JOHN YANG: Good evening.
I'm John Yang.
Gwen Ifill and Judy
Woodruff are away.
On the "NewsHour" this Labor
Day: The presidential candidates
hit the campaign trail in full
force, beginning the final
sprint to Election Day.
Also ahead: World leaders
gathered in China for the G20
Summit -- what they agreed to
and the issues that
still divide them.
Plus: a young black man's
journey into adulthood
overshadowed by racially charged
politics.
MYCHAL DENZEL SMITH, Author,
"Invisible Man, Got the Whole
World Watching: A Young Black
Man's Education": Walking
through racism is important, but
how are we dealing with talking
about patriarchy and misogyny
and homophobia and class race
elitism and mental illness?
We're not including these things
in the narrative around young
black men.
JOHN YANG: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JOHN YANG: From Labor Day to
Election Day, 64 days and six
counting.
For the presidential candidates,
today marked the start of two
months of cross-country
campaigning
to win the White House.
Lisa Desjardins has our report.
LISA DESJARDINS: Labor Day in
Detroit, a parade of
curb-to-curb union members,
lines of trucks,
and one retired worker, former
President Bill Clinton.
A holiday for most Americans,
today marks crunch time for
candidates.
Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump
hit the trail, as did their
surrogates, spread out in key
states.
Trump was swamped at a
Youngstown, Ohio, fair, pulling
out a bullhorn at one point.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: We're going to bring
jobs back to Ohio.
We're going to bring jobs
back to our country.
We're not going to make these
horrible trade deals anymore.
LISA DESJARDINS: While for
Clinton, something recently
rare, a short chat with the
press
corps.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: Last
moments before the mad dash for
the next
two months, so I hope
you guys are ready.
LISA DESJARDINS: Clinton and her
new plane were on the way to
Cleveland, where she stressed
her message on labor
and the economy.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: This is
the kind of difference that this
election really poses,
people like Tim and me who want
to create more good jobs with
rising wages and benefits
for everybody willing to work
hard, and somebody who stiffed
people, took bankruptcy and laid
off people.
One of his bankruptcies put
1,000 people out of work.
LISA DESJARDINS: The fight for
Ohio meant a fight for space on
the Cleveland tarmac
today.
Right next to Clinton's campaign
plane, sure enough, that's
Donald Trump's.
He was also making his own
pitch to Cleveland workers.
DONALD TRUMP: Our country, in
terms of manufacturing, in terms
of jobs, is going to hell.
It's going to hell.
Our jobs are being taken
out of our system.
Hillary Clinton would
be a disaster.
LISA DESJARDINS: Outside of Ohio
was left to candidates'
supporters, like Vermont Senator
Bernie Sanders, the former
Clinton opponent now promoting
her to workers.
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS (I), Vermont:
Hillary Clinton understands that
the $7.25 minimum wage is
a starvation wage.
It must be raised
to a living wage.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: In
Pennsylvania, it was Clinton's
running mate, Virginia Senator
Tim Kaine.
SEN.
TIM KAINE (D-VA), Vice
Presidential Candidate: Hey,
Pittsburgh.
How you guys doing?
LISA DESJARDINS: And the man
Kaine a hopes to replace, Vice
President Biden, on the day's
theme.
JOSEPH BIDEN, Vice President of
the United States: Does anybody
think there would be
a minimum wage without
union workers?
LISA DESJARDINS: Trump and his
choice for V.P. spent the major
campaign day traveling
on the Trump plane together,
where the nominee made it clear
he will be at all three
presidential
debates.
QUESTION: Are you doing
a lot of prep work?
DONALD TRUMP: I'm doing some.
I'm doing some.
I have seen people do so much
prep work that, when they get
out there, they can't speak.
I have seen that.
QUESTION: Do you plan
to have -- I'm sorry.
Do you plan to have mock
sessions where someone does play
her?
DONALD TRUMP: I
hadn't planned on it.
I never did it before.
LISA DESJARDINS: That crucial
first debate comes in three
weeks.
Until then, as they did today in
Michigan, Virginia, Pennsylvania
and New Hampshire,
the two campaigns plan a
frenzied focus on just a few key
states.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Lisa Desjardins.
JOHN YANG: Late this afternoon,
Hillary Clinton says she's
concerned about reports in The
Washington Post and elsewhere of
Russian cyber-attempts to
interfere with the election.
In the day's other news, the
Group of 20 major economies
wound up their week-long summit
in China.
The leaders failed to set limits
on a glut of cheap Chinese steel
exports.
But a much-anticipated climate
change announcement, and
meetings between world leaders
on the
sidelines, highlighted
the gathering.
We will have a full report
after the news summary.
At the G20 Summit, President
Obama and Russian President
Vladimir Putin failed to reach a
deal on a cease-fire in Syria.
That came as ISIS claimed
responsibility for a series of
attacks across Syria.
At least 48 people were killed.
The attacks included six suicide
bombings and a remote-controlled
bomb.
They all happened during
the morning rush hour.
Meanwhile, at least 24 people
died in twin bombings in
Afghanistan.
The Taliban said it carried out
the attacks near the Defense
Ministry in Kabul.
The first blast hit a crowded
area near a government building,
a market and a main
intersection.
The second blast struck as
authorities responded to the
first.
MAN (through translator): When
the first explosion happened,
people crowded near the site.
And then the second blast
occurred, which was really
powerful and killed lots of
people,
including workers,
women and children.
All those killed were poor
people and breadwinners of their
families.
All innocent people
were killed here.
JOHN YANG: Two of the
dead were generals.
More than 90 others
were wounded.
North Korea has fired off three
more medium-range ballistic
missiles.
They were launched about 30
miles south of Pyongyang, flew
more than 600 miles, and landed
in Japanese waters.
The United States, Japan and
others condemned the tests.
The U.N. Security Council said
it will discuss the situation
tomorrow.
Tropical storm system Hermine
slowly whirled up the U.S.
Eastern Seaboard today, staying
offshore, but chasing
people off the beaches.
The storm kicked up waves up to
20-feet high and rip currents
from New York to Cape Cod.
The storm had winds of 70 miles
an hour, but it's expected to
weaken.
Nurses went on strike today at
five hospitals in Minnesota.
They're striking over health
insurance, workplace safety and
staffing.
The Minnesota Nurses Association
represents about 4,800 members.
It called the strike after a
22-hour bargaining session ended
Saturday without an agreement.
And some good news
for the giant panda.
A group that tracks animal
populations says it's no longer
endangered.
The International Union for
Conservation of Nature says
giant panda numbers rose 17
percent
in the last 10 years
to nearly 1,900.
That's thanks to stepped-up
protections by China.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the major agreements and
disagreements from the G20
summit; the role of labor unions
in today's politics; a Web
series that lets Israelis
and Palestinians say exactly
what they think; and much more.
President Obama is on his final
trip to Asia as president.
His first stop was in China to
meet with leaders of the world's
20 largest economies.
William Brangham has a summary.
XI JINPING, Chinese President
(through translator): Ladies and
gentlemen, the 11th G20 summit
has just concluded
with great success.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
gathering's host, Chinese
President Xi Jinping, closed the
proceedings
praising the leaders for
commitments to free trade and
economic growth.
But on the major issue of
China's glut of steel
production, Xi made only limited
concessions.
He agreed to greater cooperation
on the problem, but not to any
binding limits on steel exports.
The U.S. and Europe say cheap
Chinese steel has cost jobs
worldwide.
President Obama said today it
will take time to get concrete
gains on the issue.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: It was one of a
number of examples that aren't
always sexy and don't attract a
lot of headlines of where issues
that we have raised in the
G20 get adopted and then a bunch
of work gets done, and the
following year, you start seeing
action, and slowly we strengthen
and build up international
norms.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The conflict
in Syria was also addressed this
weekend, but, again, with
little to show for it.
President Obama met with Russian
President Vladimir Putin for 90
minutes.
They talked about possible
military cooperation and a
lasting cease-fire between the
Russian-backed
Syrian government and
U.S.-backed rebels.
But he said later that a number
of sticking points remained, and
he suggested he's skeptical
that Russia would uphold
its end of any bargain.
BARACK OBAMA: Given the gaps of
trust that exist, that's a tough
negotiation.
And we haven't yet closed the
gaps in a way where we think it
would actually work.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For his part,
Putin sounded much more
optimistic.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through translator):
I have grounds to believe that
the agreements will be reached
in the next few days.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: One
headline-making moment from the
weekend came from the sidelines
of
the G20 on the issue
of climate change.
President Obama and Chinese
President Xi announced Saturday
their governments will formally
join
last year's landmark
Paris agreement.
It sets up a framework for
dozens of nations to reduce
greenhouse gases in the coming
decades.
The president said the U.S. and
China standing together on the
issue sends a clear message
to the world.
BARACK OBAMA: Our entrance into
this agreement continues the
momentum of Paris and should
give the rest of the world
confidence, whether developed or
developing countries, that a
low-carbon future is where
the world is heading.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: With the G20
now over, Obama flew on to Laos
today for a summit with South
Asian leaders.
He had planned to meet there
with the Philippines' new
president, Rodrigo Duterte.
But, today, Duterte angrily
warned he won't discuss
widespread killings of drug
suspects,
and he aimed a profanity
at Mr. Obama.
RODRIGO DUTERTE, Philippine
President (through translator):
Son of a (EXPLETIVE DELETED),
I will swear at you
in that forum.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Hours after
hearing that, President Obama
his planned meeting with
Duterte.
The president will be
in Laos until Thursday.
For more on what happened during
the G20, and what's to come for
the rest of the president's
trip to Asia, we turn
to Edward Alden.
He's a senior fellow at the
Council on Foreign Relations,
where he focuses on U.S. trade
policy.
And David Ignatius, foreign
policy columnist at The
Washington Post.
Gentlemen, thank you both
very much for being here.
David, I would start with you.
You watched what went
down this weekend.
What was your take
on what happened?
DAVID IGNATIUS, Columnist, The
Washington Post: I think,
basically, in terms of bilateral
U.S.-China relations, this was a
reinforcement of the pattern
that we have seen for the last
couple of years.
The U.S. and China work together
on issues of mutual interest.
Climate change has been the
obvious example since 2014.
They did a significant step
forward in agreeing to enter the
Paris pact on climate change.
That was the headline
achievement of the summit.
But on so many other issues
where they are not in synch, the
South China Sea most obviously,
but just the kind of prickly of
the U.S.-China relationship,
this whole fracas about when
the president's plane landed
about who would get off by what
ramp -- why, ramp gate, I
was thinking they should call
this -- it's obvious that there
is just a lot of distance
between the two.
So, I think that's a snapshot of
where the relationship is, as
Barack Obama's presidency
ends.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Edward Alden,
I know this -- we touched on
this briefly in the beginning,
the issue of this deal.
The Chinese deal, this was
something the president hoped to
take a crack at, but didn't
really
succeed.
Can you explain for those who
haven't really been following
this, what is the issue that
the U.S. and other
nations have with China?
EDWARD ALDEN, Council on Foreign
Relations: Well, I think trade
is one those areas that
David mentioned where relations
have really gotten more tense
over the eight years of
the Obama administration.
Steel is really a
good example of it.
China entered the WTO in 2001.
And I think the hope of the
United States at the time and of
the West was that China
would gradually become a more
market-oriented economy, would
start to look more like the
capitalist economies of the West
and really adopt those rules in
terms of how it structured
its economy.
We haven't really
seen that play out.
So, particularly in the heavy
industries, Chinese governments
at very levels heavily
subsidize those industries.
And so what we have seen is
Chinese production increase
very, very dramatically.
And steel is by far the
worst offender here.
So, if you go back to 2000, the
United States and China produced
about the same about of
steel.
(CROSSTALK)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Fifteen years ago.
EDWARD ALDEN: Fifteen years ago,
roughly the same amount, 130
metric tons each, roughly.
Since that time, China's
production has grown by 990
million metric tons.
So, it's increased
basically 10-fold.
U.S. production has dropped a
little bit over that period of
time.
And so the rest of the world is
saying to China, look, you have
got to change these
practices.
It's not just steel, but steel
is the biggest one, where you
are subsidizing industries
to produce far beyond what
the market is dictating.
And it's creating a lot of
tensions with your trading
partners.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: David, another
one of the issues that the
president tried to bring up
in his meeting with Vladimir
Putin was the issue of Syria.
And they tried to -- apparently
had a long conversation about
can there be some sort
of a cease-fire?
And the president was very open,
as open as you can in these
types of meetings, to say,
even if we got an agreement,
which they didn't get, I'm not
sure, the United States can't
be sure that Putin will live
up to his end of the bargain.
DAVID IGNATIUS: The level of
suspicion in the U.S.-Russia
relationship now is as high
as I think any time since the
fall of the Soviet Union.
Putin is very aggressive in his
behavior in Syria, in Ukraine.
The technical details of the
Syria agreement have been held
up for a couple of weeks, but,
fundamentally, the problem here
is that Putin is allied with
Bashar al-Assad, who the U.S.
regards as the source
of the problem.
And the U.S., although it says
otherwise, is fighting alongside
the al-Qaida affiliate
in Syria, the Nusra Front.
It's renamed itself, but it's
still the al-Qaida affiliate.
It's a very awkward
position for us to be in.
And it's just not clear how you
get an agreement when those are
the basic elements.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: David is
talking about this issue of
trust with regards to Russia.
The issue of trust with regards
to China comes up as well,
particularly about climate
change.
And we saw them signing these
Paris accords on Saturday.
These were accords that were
agreed to back in January.
A lot of critics of that
agreement say the U.S. can put
whatever smiley face it wants
to on these agreements and do
what it can to cut carbon
emissions, but that the Chinese
-- it's a voluntary agreement
-- they won't do the same.
So, to the same point, do you
think that the U.S. can trust
China on this particular issue?
EDWARD ALDEN: I think, on
climate, there is the potential
for a different dynamic.
I think that falls more into
David's first basket of areas
where the U.S. and China really
see a common interest.
If you look at trade, the
Chinese see it very zero sum.
So, if they produce less steel,
other countries are going to
produce more steel.
They're going to export less.
They're going to import more.
They lose.
They see trade in zero
sum, mercantilist terms.
And the climate issue
really is different.
I think, first, the Chinese do
recognize the reality of global
climate change.
They recognize their role in it.
So I think they are genuinely
worried about that.
Domestically, they have got an
enormous problem with pollution.
So to the extent that they
continue to use dirty coal, that
causes domestic unrest, because
you can't breathe in
the major cities.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: David,
last question to you.
This is obviously the
president's last trip to Asia,
after his much heralded pivot to
Asia.
Do you think, now that we're
hearing the end of the Obama
presidency, that that has borne
fruit for the
president's policies?
DAVID IGNATIUS: I think it
was sound conceptually.
One of the tragedies of Barack
Obama's presidency is that he's
been unable to escape the
gravitational
field of the Middle East.
He's ended up fighting
a war against ISIS.
He's back in Iraq.
He's in Syria, although
he doesn't want to be.
I think, for countries in Asia,
they see a rising China pushing
its weight around more
and more.
They want to feel that the U.S.
is really there to stay as a
reliable, dependable ally.
The president's last big effort
is going to be to try to pass
the Trans-Pacific Partnership,
the big trade agreement.
(CROSSTALK)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Huge
congressional opposition.
DAVID IGNATIUS: Well, there's a
lot of congressional opposition.
There's also quite
a lot of support.
But I think Obama rightly sees
that, in terms of our
credibility in Asia to countries
like
Vietnam, the Philippines, even
Australia, it's crucial that he
get this passed, or do
everything he can in the
lame-duck session to -- as a
demonstration to people we're
still
-- we're still here, we
still care about Asia.
If the president leaves office
with that going down in a
tailspin, I think we're going to
see a story of China asserting
itself with new power and
credibility, because America
will have been seen as the
ally that couldn't deliver.
EDWARD ALDEN: Can I just say
that I agree very much with
David on that, but I'm not
optimistic about the TPP getting
through in this administration.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Why not?
EDWARD ALDEN: I have watched the
votes on every big trade deal
going back to NAFTA.
And what you have seen is a
hardening of opposition in the
Democratic Party and a
fracturing of
the Republican Party, under the
influence of Donald Trump, who
has, of course, come
out very strongly against
these trade agreements.
In the past, Democratic
presidents could rely on pretty
strong Republican support.
I think that's vanished.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Gentlemen,
thank you both very much for
being here.
EDWARD ALDEN: Thank you.
DAVID IGNATIUS: Thank you.
JOHN YANG: On this Labor Day,
we turn now to organized labor.
Union membership has been on the
decline in the United States for
decades: According to
the Labor Department, just 11.1
percent of wage and salary
workers belonged to a union
last year.
That's almost half the union
membership rate in the 1980s.
Hari Sreenivasan has our story.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For more now
on the state of labor, we're
going to by Mary Kay Henry,
president of the Service
Employees International Union,
or SEIU, and Harley Shaiken, a
professor
and labor expert at the
University of California,
Berkeley.
Professor Shaiken, let
me start with you.
When we think of the labor
movement, we certainly think
that it's smaller than it used
to be,
but what are the challenges that
the movement is facing today?
HARLEY SHAIKEN, University of
California, Berkeley: Well,
there are many challenges
that are out there right now,
but it's a particularly critical
and urgent time for the labor
movement
and I think for the United
States more generally.
Over the last three decades,
labor has declined from
representing one out of every
five members
to one out of every 10 today.
But recent polls from Bloomberg
and others indicate that over
half of people polled would
like to join a union.
How does that square with
11 percent being in unions?
And, here, I think we're looking
at tough employer opposition,
laws that don't facilitate
a free choice, and some broader
changes in the economy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Well, Mary Kay
Henry, how do you square that
gap, if people are interested
still in being part of a union,
but the reality is that they're
not?
MARY KAY HENRY, President,
Service Employees International
Union: Twenty million people
have got more money in their
pockets just in the last four
years because 200 fast food
workers had the guts to make a
decision to strike and possibly
lose their job, threaten
their whole family's stability,
and make a demand that people
laughed at four years ago,
$15 in a union, and now it's a
standard against which people
are organizing saying, hey, why
do I have to wait so
long to get to $15?
Or, in Birmingham, Alabama, the
city council raises wages.
The Alabama state
legislature overrides it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In
Scandinavian countries, they
have almost set a wage floor,
even without
having a minimum wage, because
about 80 percent of the people,
say, in Denmark are already
unionized.
Right?
The private sector says, to be
competitive, I have to raise my
wages up.
Is the inverse happening
in the United States?
With such a small unionized
population, it seems the private
sector doesn't see unions
as much of a threat or an
incentive to try to pull their
wages up by themselves.
MARY KAY HENRY: Right.
And the absence of government,
working people and employers
sharing a vision for what
everybody
deserves in the country, we have
the grossest inequality that our
generation has ever seen
in this country.
And fast food workers are asking
themselves, hey, if McDonald's,
Wendy's and Burger King
can provide $20 in Denmark,
where 80 percent of the people
have a union, why can't they
do the same thing in the
United States of America?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Professor
Shaiken, tell us a little bit
about how unions are adapting
to what's happening in
the sharing economy.
Right?
It seems that there was a
different relationship that we
had with an employer, where
perhaps
not thinking about working for
one company for 40 years to get
the Rolex watch, and then
we moved into an era where we
were thinking, all right, maybe
five years, six years.
Now we're saying, well, I want
to dedicate 20 minutes of my
time to driving a shared
car.
And then I might have a
difference service that I might
provide.
What happens to benefits?
What happens to that
relationship with a union or an
employer?
HARLEY SHAIKEN: Well, the
sharing economy is a critical
challenge for unions today.
The sharing economy is not
something that exists in nature.
It is also an employer strategy,
in many cases, to avoid unions.
So, companies such as Uber or
Lyft define the jobs in a way
where they're essentially
saying part-time workers,
flexible workers can't have a
union.
They're independent contractors.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mary Kay
Henry, how do you adapt to that?
It seems that if you're
bargaining with an employer, one
of the fundamentals is, when
will my employee actually
be here and working for me?
But if we're walking into a
world in the next 15, 20 years
where people parse their work
out so much, how do you
negotiate on their behalf?
MARY KAY HENRY: Independent flat
janitors in Chicago got together
when their employers
were all different building
owners, and formed a union and
negotiated a contract.
Home care providers were seen
as nothing more than servants.
They got together, formed an
employer, and actually raised
wages.
So, we believe those same
principles need to be applied in
the sharing economy.
And our members in many cities
around the country are
supporting the organizing of
Uber
drivers or other unions that are
working in the sharing economy.
It's 1 percent of the
economy right now.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Professor
Shaiken, pivoting just a bit to
politics, since there is an
election coming up, it seems
that Bernie Sanders and Donald
Trump rally their bases by
saying,
hey, you know what, politicians
are not hearing the voices of
American workers.
Well, what happened?
What created that gap and that
opportunity for these two
politicians, especially in the
context of the union movement?
HARLEY SHAIKEN: Well, I would
start by saying these are very
different politicians who went
in very different directions.
But they both did, as you point
out, essentially channel this
deep anger, apprehension and
frustration that so many
people are experiencing.
In part, it reflects two things
that Mary Kay Henry has pointed
to, the extreme inequality
that exists in this country.
It's not really a question of
inequality, but extreme
inequality that takes us beyond
the Gilded Age in some ways, and
the immediate manifestation to
millions of workers of stagnant
or declining wages, and few
opportunities to advance
themselves, let alone their
children.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mary Kay
Henry, do unions still have the
power to get out the vote,
especially in this
coming election?
And, also, there seems to be a
little bit of a fracture, where
the leadership of unions
might be supporting
overwhelmingly Hillary Clinton,
while there still seems to be an
opportunity for Donald Trump to
speak to the base, the rank and
file.
MARY KAY HENRY: Seventy percent
of SEIU members support Hillary
Clinton.
And, yes, the labor unions
absolutely do have the power to
be an essential part of the
entire
coalition of partners that needs
to make the case to our members
about why voting matters
to the future for our children
and our grandchildren.
And our members all across this
country -- I will be in
Pittsburgh.
We are doing phone-banking and
door-knocking in L.A. One-on-one
communication, based on
relationship, we think is
turnkey to people understanding
why elections matter and why
we need to stay in the streets
after the election and hold
every elected official
accountable
to an agenda that addresses the
worst inequality of our
generation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Mary Kay Henry from the SEIU,
Harley Shaiken, thank so much
for joining us.
HARLEY SHAIKEN: Thank you.
MARY KAY HENRY: Thank you.
JOHN YANG: Online, we get two
more views of labor unions and
workers' rights.
First, find eight ideas to help
workers thrive as labor unions
decline, plus an interview
with a leading labor organizer
about the need to reinvent
employee bargaining.
Find that on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
So, how much does organized
labor matter in modern-day
presidential campaigns?
Are Donald Trump's efforts to
court African-Americans winning
voters, black or otherwise?
And what to expect, if anything,
when Congress returns to
Washington tomorrow?
With all these questions and
more, it's the perfect time for
this Labor Day edition of
Politics Monday.
And for that, we are joined by
Stu Rothenberg of The Washington
Post and The Rothenberg
& Gonzales Political Report, and
Susan Page, the Washington
bureau chief for USA Today.
Susan, Stu, thanks
for joining us.
Welcome.
Coming out of that conversation
about labor unions today, Susan,
what is the influence
of labor in a political
campaign like this year's?
SUSAN PAGE, Washington Bureau
Chief, USA Today: Well, labor
leaders are pretty influential
in the Democratic Party, but
they may or may not be able to
deliver many of their actual
voters.
Labor union members, especially
white men, are the target group
for Donald Trump.
He's had a lot of success
in getting their support.
So, it's not at all clear that
labor unions will be able to do
as much as they once could
to get their members to actually
vote for the candidate the union
itself supports.
JOHN YANG: So, Stu, what does
an endorsement mean these days?
STUART ROTHENBERG, Editor and
Publisher, The Rothenberg &
Gonzales Political Report: Well,
not as much as it meant in
the '70s or '80s certainly.
Back then, the endorsement was a
big thing, whether it was Walter
Mondale or Howard Dean.
I think it brings some money and
it brings the stamp of approval
from organized labor.
But, look, the Democratic
coalition has changed.
It includes environmentalists
and women's groups.
It's a very different party.
And so labor is still a part of
it, but it's not the dominant
part that it once was.
JOHN YANG: Donald Trump this
past week went -- this past
weekend, went to a black church
in Detroit.
What do you make of this?
What -- his outreach to black
voters, or apparent outreach to
black voters?
SUSAN PAGE: I would give him
some credit for going to speak
to African-American voters.
He hadn't done that before.
It's not an audience that he
would expect to be particularly
friendly to him, so I think
that's a good thing that
presidential candidates
sometimes do.
That said, I don't think his
real target are African-American
voters.
It is hard to imagine that
Donald Trump gets into
double-digit support when it
comes to
African-Americans.
But I think he has found that,
in order to reach
college-educated white voters,
he needs
to address some of the concerns
that he has had racist appeals,
racist and provocative
language about Mexicans and
Muslims and about
African-Americans.
And I think that's more of what
he's trying's to do with these
events.
JOHN YANG: Stu, there was an
interesting point in The New
York Times this morning talking
about focus groups in Florida
and Ohio among African-American
voters.
We know the historical
connection between Bill Clinton
and black voters.
But they found that younger
black voters have reservations
about Hillary Clinton.
STUART ROTHENBERG: I think
younger voters across the races
have concerns about her.
They don't see her the way older
African-Americans see her or her
husband.
So, you know, she's going to
have to try harder to get
younger voters of all races.
And I don't think she will do as
well as Barack Obama, but that's
a pretty high standard.
But I think her advantage still
is not her strength and her
appeal, but it is the fact
that Donald Trump has no
standing in the community.
And he can go to
African-American churches from
now until next Thursday, and
it's not
going to change that.
He really has never built any
sort of fundamental base with
that community.
And that's a big problem.
You know, we're two months away
from the election, and voters
know that.
White voters know that.
Asian-American voters know that.
And African-American
voters know that.
And they have become
cynical, as they should.
SUSAN PAGE: But you think about
younger African-Americans not
being as supportive of Hillary
Clinton
as they were of Barack Obama
or even of Bill Clinton.
It's the same problem she has
with younger women, women under
35.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Yes.
SUSAN PAGE: And I think
experiences of the millennial
generation is just different
from
the experiences of their parents
and their grandparents.
And so some of these political
distinctions are going to
change.
And I think you see fewer
differences on race with voters
under 35 than you do with older
voters.
STUART ROTHENBERG: But it's not
as if younger voters are going
to be attracted to Donald
Trump either.
SUSAN PAGE: No.
STUART ROTHENBERG: He has shown
no ability to get that
electorate either.
SUSAN PAGE: But to Gary Johnson
maybe or to Jill Stein, I think
their highest levels of
support, even though they're not
that high, their highest levels
of support are among
younger voters.
JOHN YANG: Is there anything she
can do, Hillary Clinton can do,
to get try to those younger
voters back?
She had trouble with them when
she was competing with Bernie
Sanders in the primaries, but
is there anything she can do?
STUART ROTHENBERG: Oh, I think
it's all about Trump and
ratcheting up the risk of what a
Trump presidency would mean to
the country and to these younger
voters, who are -- tend
to be -- favor diversity and
tolerance and they're more open.
And they're more progressive
in their cultural views.
And Donald Trump, last time I
looked, wouldn't be described in
those terms.
SUSAN PAGE: Although there are
only, what, 64 days left until
-- the campaign.
That's not very long, and these
are two candidates who are
pretty well known.
On the other hand, we are going
to have three presidential
debates and the vice
presidential
debate.
We are going to have weeks in
which voters are really
intensely looking at this
campaign.
And I think there is still room
for things to change, for
candidates to either do really
well in debates and have people
take a second look or to do
really poorly and have the
opposite
effect.
JOHN YANG: Well, there are
other races on the ballot.
Congress, for instance, will be
-- the entire House will be up.
They will be back tomorrow
briefly to try to get some
business done.
Do we expect anything to happen
on the Hill in the next what --
how long are they here?
Four weeks?
SUSAN PAGE: They're
here for four weeks.
They have just taken
seven weeks off.
These are jobs we should
all aspire to have.
(LAUGHTER)
SUSAN PAGE: I think there are
only two things you should
really expect Congress to do.
One is to pass a short-term
funding bill, because it's not
in their political interest
to shut down the government when
the fiscal year comes into
effect, the new fiscal year,
on October 1.
The second thing, I
think, is Zika funding.
This has been put off and
off for months and months.
The situation in Florida and
elsewhere just keeps getting
worse.
And I think there is a
bipartisan sense that they need
to pass that $1.1 billion Zika
funding
bill, and quick.
JOHN YANG: Stu?
STUART ROTHENBERG: No, I agree.
They're not going to do anything
substantive beyond that.
They have got to keep the -- the
Republicans have to keep the
government open.
They certainly don't want to
be dogged with that problem.
And Zika funding, there is
significant support, but, of
course, there has been support
for
many weeks now.
And the Senate was unable
to deal with it initially.
So, we will see.
I think it's possible.
I don't think even Zika
funding is a slam dunk.
SUSAN PAGE: We had a USA
Today-Suffolk University poll
that came out today, and it
showed that
three out of 10 Americans say
that someone in their family,
themselves or someone else
in their families have changed
their plans for travel or other
things because of fear
of the Zika virus.
That's really an enormous
number of Americans.
And almost two-thirds said, yes,
Congress should pass this bill,
including most overwhelming
number of Democrats, but a
plurality of Republicans as
well.
I do think there is a head of
steam behind Zika funding.
JOHN YANG: There was another
poll in USA Today last week
about that there is all this
talk
about will the Democrats take
back the Senate and try to take
back the House, and there
was an interesting finding
about ticket-splitting.
SUSAN PAGE: So,
here's what we found.
A majority of Hillary Clinton
supporters say they are likely
to split their ticket.
So, they will vote for Hillary
Clinton, but they will vote for
Republicans for the Senate
or governor or some other
races down the ballot.
But a majority of Donald Trump
voters said they wouldn't split
their ticket.
They're going to stick
on the Republican side.
This is very good news for those
endangered Republican Senate
incumbents who are fighting
so hard in swing states where
Donald Trump is having a lot of
trouble.
STUART ROTHENBERG: I think we
will see more of this don't give
Hillary Clinton a blank
check from Republicans in the
House and the Senate in states
that are competitive.
And I think Republicans actually
do have a fighting chance to
hold on onto the Senate.
I didn't think so six
months ago, but I do now.
JOHN YANG: We have less
than a minute left.
There was a story in The
Washington Post this morning
that said that federal officials
are
looking into a broad covert
Russian operation to sow public
distrust in the election, the
hacking and all
the other things.
How big a problem could this be?
Could there be questions about
the legitimacy of this election
in November?
SUSAN PAGE: I think this is just
a huge issue about Russian
actions to try to meddle in
our politics.
I think it's amazing
and very disturbing.
And the last thing we need in
this country are people not
believing that they're getting
an accurate count of the vote.
STUART ROTHENBERG: I think, more
broadly, people are very
suspicious about government
and vote counters and election
watchers on both sides of the
aisle, particularly on the
Trump side.
So, I imagine that, after the
results are in, we will hear
from some corners some
complaints
about, can we really
trust these numbers?
SUSAN PAGE: And if you want to
make it hard for a new president
to govern, just let there
be questions about how
he or she were elected.
JOHN YANG: Right.
Exactly.
Susan Page, Stu Rothenberg,
thanks for joining us.
SUSAN PAGE: Thank you.
STUART ROTHENBERG: Thanks, John.
JOHN YANG: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
clothing company keeps jobs in
America; and growing up black
in the age of President
Barack Obama.
But, first: We look at the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict
through the lens of
Canadian-Israeli
Corey Gil-Shuster.
He runs The Ask Project.
Gil-Shuster solicits questions
from the Web and then hits the
streets of Israel and the
West Bank to ask serious and at
times provocative questions.
He posts the answers,
unedited, on YouTube.
"PBS NewsHour" contributor
Justin Kenny recently followed
Gil-Shuster and produced this
report.
Corey Gil-Shuster, The Ask
Project: If you were driving on
the highway and there was
a Palestinian on the side of the
highway that seemed to need
help, would you stop and help?
WOMAN: If I'm by myself in the
car, I won't stop to anyone.
It doesn't matter if it's a man,
a woman, in the middle of the
road.
If I am with someone, like my
husband, and we see something,
maybe we will stop.
COREY GIL-SHUSTER: My name
is Corey Gil-Shuster.
I run The Ask an Israeli,
Ask a Palestinian Project.
If you were driving on the
highway and you saw an Israeli
on the side of the road that
needed help, would you stop?
SAMI HABASH,
Palestinian: Why not?
Some day, he will help me.
But if I saw -- if I see that he
is shooting, I will shoot back.
COREY GIL-SHUSTER: The project
is about finding out what
Israelis and Palestinians really
believe and think
about the conflict.
People from all around the world
send me questions through
e-mail.
I choose the questions, and then
I go out to the streets of
Israel and Palestine to
ask random Israelis and
Palestinians to answer the
questions themselves.
I don't edit any
content out of it.
DURA, Palestinian: Most, the
majority, they want two states,
an Israeli state and a
Palestinian
state.
RISHON LEZION, Israeli:
They are very primitive.
And they cannot build a
country like we did.
WOMAN (through translator): For
sure, the Israelis will be
destroyed because Palestine
is not their right.
COREY GIL-SHUSTER:
Destroyed as in killed?
WOMAN (through translator):
They should be killed, yes.
COREY GIL-SHUSTER: What are you
willing to compromise for peace?
DROR, Israeli: Everything.
My pants.
COREY GIL-SHUSTER: The question
is, don't you think Israel is
committing suicide by
holding onto the West Bank?
NOGA TARNOPOLSKY: I think
that's a really bad question.
COREY GIL-SHUSTER: OK, why?
NOGA TARNOPOLSKY: Because
it's a leading question.
COREY GIL-SHUSTER: A lot of the
questions I get are what I call
gotcha questions.
They're a little bit over the
top, or exaggerated, or have a
very overly simplistic way of
looking
at the conflict.
And I ask them exactly that way,
or try to as much as possible,
because I think it's
interesting for Israelis or
Palestinians to hear what people
from outside think.
And I want them to
answer in an honest way.
NOGA TARNOPOLSKY: The answer is
sometimes I do and sometimes I
don't.
COREY GIL-SHUSTER: OK, what way
-- OK, so, give me an example.
Why do you think yes and
why do you think no?
NOGA TARNOPOLSKY: I think the
investment that Israel is making
in the territories is
unjustified.
I think that the emphasis on the
West Bank in the Israeli
political arena is absolutely
outsized.
And when I say no, I say no
because I think that other
things are happening in the
world.
I think Israel has
many problems.
I don't think Israel
is committing suicide.
COREY GIL-SHUSTER: I'm often
accused of asking these leading
questions purposely, as if it's
my politics or if that's where I
want the agenda of the videos to
go, and it really
isn't.
It really is -- I'm trying to
speak in the voice of the person
asking.
We are on our way now to
Qalandiya checkpoint into the
West Bank.
And from there, we are going
to head out to Nablus.
This is the Qalandiya
checkpoint.
It's a major checkpoint,
actually much more for
Palestinians coming into Israel
who have
permits or Jerusalem --
Palestinian Jerusalemites who
work in the West Bank, so they
go back
and forth.
Nablus is actually my favorite
-- I think this is my favorite
city in the West Bank.
It kind of has everything.
It has poor, rich, middle-class.
A variety of different
groups live there.
And people love to shop.
Well, that's true all
over the West Bank.
And it's just really
lively all the time.
The law is that Jewish Israelis
are not allowed legally to be in
certain areas of the West
Bank.
Technically, it's not
legal, what I'm doing.
My family is really not
supportive of me going to the
West Bank.
They really believe I'm
going to be killed.
MANAR: My name is Manar.
I'm a translator.
I'm 30 years old, and
I'm from Ramallah.
Some people find it, I won't say
offensive, but they don't like
that he lives in Tel Aviv.
We don't say that he is Israeli.
And it's better, because people
would be more comfortable that
way.
COREY GIL-SHUSTER: Do you think
this project will have much of
an impact?
MANAR: I hope so.
I really hope so, because it's
about bringing people closer
together.
COREY GIL-SHUSTER: I do this
because I think it's so
important that, if you want to
solve
a conflict, you need
to problem-solve.
And if you want to
problem-solve, you need to know
what you're dealing with.
If you don't know what you're
dealing with, then no solution
is ever going to help.
JOHN YANG: Next: one company's
attempt to bring textile jobs to
rural America through
an unusual approach.
Hari Sreenivasan is
back with that story.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It doesn't
look like the textile mill towns
of New England and it's
certainly not Silicon Valley.
Yet here in Pagosa Springs,
Colorado, a mountain town of
less than 2,000 people, an
upstart
company hopes to disrupt the
textile industry using a
high-tech, outside-the-box
approach.
The company is called Voormi, a
made-up name for a mythological
mountain creature.
And it was started by former
His idea?
To manufacture a brand-new kind
of fabric from locally sourced
materials and then sew
the garments in small
micro-factories in rural
communities.
DAN ENGLISH, Founder, Voormi:
It's more like a craft approach,
kind of like the beer industry.
We like to think, if we can take
a small batch mentality and turn
things quicker, that consumers
want new, fresh things
on a regular basis.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The clothing
is made for recreation in harsh
conditions, whether that's
mountain biking under the
blazing sun, fishing in icy cold
streams, or climbing in all
kinds
of weather.
English wanted to build his
company in a region where his
products could be sewn in the
morning
and tested in the afternoon.
So he chose Pagosa Springs,
surrounded by two million acres
of national forest.
DAN ENGLISH: We have a large
staff of so-called mountain
professionals, whether they're
ski
patrollers, or river guides or
fly fishing guides, or hunting
outfitters, that love to
test our gear.
And these guys give us
honest, straight feedback.
HARI SREENIVASAN: English has
chosen not to outsource to large
sewing facilities in Asia,
where much of the once-strong
U.S. textile industry ended up.
That shift left many communities
in the U.S. devastated.
DAN ENGLISH: What we hope to do
is provide an industry in small
rural towns that allow
people to live here, play here,
and work here without having to
have multiple jobs throughout
the year.
HARI SREENIVASAN: English
eventually hopes to have as many
as 10 facilities, each with
eight to 10 sewers, scattered
throughout Colorado.
Currently, he has just three,
including this one at the
company headquarters.
Twenty-four year old Joan Walker
says being able to work in the
area where she grew up
has been a dream come true.
She graduated from college two
years ago with a degree in
fashion design.
JOAN WALKER, Voormi: I was
pretty convinced that I was just
going to have to settle in
a city for a couple of years, or
probably longer than a couple of
years, until I could
do something differently to get
back to where I really wanted to
be.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Melinda Volger
wasn't as lucky when she
graduated from college 35 years
ago.
She too was a fashion design
major who wanted to return to
her hometown, but because there
were no full-time sewing jobs,
she became a secretary, and did
sewing alterations on
the side.
Now she designs and sews
full-time for Voormi, and has
just a one-minute commute,
walking
across the back alley from
her home to the shop.
MELINDA VOLGER, Voormi: I get to
give input on the design process
from the start, through
the pattern-making, through
making the initial prototypes.
And they're very accepting of
any suggestions that I have, and
we work as a team back and
forth.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Like all of
the employees at Voormi, Volger
and Walker wear many hats.
Not only do they design and sew.
They also take shifts working
at the retail store.
CEO English says that makes the
company more responsive to the
needs of customers.
DAN ENGLISH: It's a new
way of manufacturing.
It's what we believe is the
future of manufacturing.
It's a very -- it's a much
more nimble experience.
And it's a wider
range of skill set.
And that's what
we're focused on.
And we think that's repeatable
and scalable across the United
States, and especially in
rural communities that
need economic development.
HARI SREENIVASAN: University of
Denver business professor Kerry
Plemmons:
KERRY PLEMMONS, University of
Denver: Somebody like Voormi who
can say, I see a trend, jump
right on that trip with what we
would call agility, and an
agility to jump on a trend,
and then be first to market, in
that -- because the thing about
Voormi that I think important
is, they know who their
target market is.
And it's a niche.
It's not broad, like Target or
Wal-Mart, but they have a
specific segment.
They can address that segment.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That
segment is very high-end.
A simple T-shirt costs $80.
Lightweight jackets start in the
mid-$200s and go up from there.
English admits he's serving
a specific market.
DAN ENGLISH: We have a saying
here, that our goal is to make
competition irrelevant.
And if we try to do the same
thing that other big brands are
doing, you know, it just won't
work.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Voormi
clothing has been getting
positive reviews in sports
magazines.
But whether the company will be
able to meet increasing demand
while keeping its commitment
to rural economic development
remains to be seen.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JOHN YANG: Finally tonight: the
story of a black man growing up
in a society fraught
with racial tension.
Jeffrey Brown has the latest
addition to our "NewsHour"
bookshelf.
JEFFREY BROWN: "I started this
book with the question, how did
you learn to be a black
man?"
That line comes from the new
book titled "Invisible Man, Got
the Whole World Watching: A
Young
Black Man's Education."
Author Mychal Denzel Smith is a
contributing writer for "The
Nation" and other publications.
This is his first book.
And welcome to you.
MYCHAL DENZEL SMITH, Author,
"Invisible Man, Got the Whole
World Watching: A Young Black
Man's Education": Thank
you for having me.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let's start with
that question, how did you learn
to be a black man?
Why was that the question?
Why was that still
the question today?
MYCHAL DENZEL SMITH: Well, so
the book has its Genesis after
George Zimmerman killed
Trayvon Martin
February 26, 2012.
After that event, we were having
a conversation about the lives
of black men in America, and
particularly young black men and
the experience of walking
through a world that's still --
where
racism persists, and the
judgment on the basis of
stereotype has this effect where
one's
life could be taken.
And we were having a
conversation about the talk that
black parents would give to
young
black men about how to survive
in this country, how to comport
oneself with authorities.
JEFFREY BROWN: How to behave.
MYCHAL DENZEL SMITH:
How to behave.
And what it did was, it was
flattening the experience of
what it is to be a young black
man in America, and to say that
that's the only thing that we
have to concern ourselves
with.
Like, it's a big deal to --
continually to exist in a
country that upholds racist
ideas
and racist structures, but the
interior of black men's lives
are a thing that we don't
really talk too much about,
right, the nuances of our
experience.
Walking through racism is
important, but how are we
dealing with talking about
patriarchy
and misogyny and homophobia and
class race elitism and mental
illness?
We're not including these things
in the narrative around young
black men.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, you do that
by taking us through your
education, looking to role
models that you looked to,
right, leaders, writers,
musicians.
MYCHAL DENZEL SMITH: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: You also refer to
a kind of traditional black
narrative.
You said, the traditional black
narrative, I experienced racism,
I overcame racism.
And you're specifically doing
something different or feeling
something different.
MYCHAL DENZEL SMITH: Yes.
I don't think that it's
something to overcome.
I think that these are systems
that we are experiencing and
need to be dismantled, but
I think that there is a feeling,
particularly in black
communities, that one does the
hard
work and does -- and presents
himself as twice as good and as
respectable, and that you will
be spared the sting of racism,
because it cannot touch you if
you present yourself as
impenetrable to it.
And it's just not true.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: Mr. Speaker...
MYCHAL DENZEL SMITH: We have
lived through eight years of a
black presidency, and we
have seen the amount of racist
attacks against him, a man who,
by all measures, is the most
respectable black man that the
United States has ever produced,
and achieved the highest
office in the land and can still
be hit with racism and has faced
the most recalcitrant
Republican Congress in history,
on the basis of racist backlash.
So, that idea just does not sit.
JEFFREY BROWN: Barack Obama,
this presidency that we have
lived through, is perhaps the
most pivotal figure in this book
for your life and for our times.
MYCHAL DENZEL SMITH: Yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: But, for you,
most interestingly, what comes
through is the deep ambivalence
you feel about him, right, that
he is almost not who you wanted
to be.
MYCHAL DENZEL SMITH: Yes, well,
he's not -- it's not a question
of whether I want him to be
anyone.
Right?
I think that he is who he is,
and he's a product of certain
traditions and ideology.
And he's only -- he's only
president -- the first black
president possible because of
the ideology that he espouses,
because he is sort of -- he is a
very centrist, mainstream
Democrat whose politics are not
going to challenge the status
quo in radical ways.
And so, yes, he's successful
in large part because of that.
And he's the first black
president in part because his
narrative, his story doesn't
remind
people of America's racism, in
the same ways that a person who
is a descendent of slavery
would.
He is not of that.
So, there are certain things
that make Barack Obama possible
and make him an inspirational
figure in a lot of ways, but
then there is the way in which
he talks to and about black
America.
I think that a lot of what he --
the work that he has done in
assuring voters who turned
out, white voters to turn out
for him, was that he wasn't
going to play favoritism to
black America, that he wasn't a
race man, that he wasn't
concerned about the idea of
racism to the point of policy
changes and an actual shift in
the way in which we conduct
business here in
the United States.
JEFFREY BROWN: And you wanted
something more from him and from
yourself, from others?
MYCHAL DENZEL SMITH: I would
like to see more movement on the
ground and
consciousness-shifting
and discuss -- and discourse in
our everyday lives, so that we
produce the kind of politicians
that respond to that.
I would like to see more of us
engaged in reckoning with the
history of the United States.
I would like to see more of us
dealing with what the present of
racism looks like, so
that we understand how this
country is built and who it's
meant to benefit.
And, in that way, when we, as
voting constituencies, shift the
way that we're thinking about
it,
our politicians have no other
choice but to respond.
JEFFREY BROWN: And what about
for yourself, finally?
You write near the end of the
book about wanting to become, as
you say, an honest black man
and a good black writer.
What does that mean?
What are you aspiring to?
MYCHAL DENZEL SMITH: The honesty
is that -- is knowing that there
has been a very masculinist
narrative around black life in
the United States, and that
someone in my position, as
a cisgender, heterosexual black
man, knows what that experience
is and can continue to
repeat it over and over again,
and never have to interrogate
complicity within other
structures
of oppressions.
And I think being honest means
that we start doing the work of
that interrogation for
ourselves,
and that gets us to a politics
that's more open and more
inclusive and talking about
equality and just
for all people.
JEFFREY BROWN: The book is
"Invisible Man, Got the Whole
World Watching: A Young Black
Man's Education."
Mychal Denzel Smith, thank you.
MYCHAL DENZEL SMITH: Thank you.
JOHN YANG: That's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Tuesday: going back to school
and teaching math to
3-year-olds, our weekly Making
the
Grade education report.
I'm John Yang.
Join us online and again
here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you.
Good night.